Today we will be discussing the Dharma Sutra,
Chapter 51: How is the Buddha Supreme?
The king asked, "I agree, the Buddha is
supreme and supreme." But
how exactly is he supreme and supreme? Na Xian
replied, "Supreme and supreme means surpassing humans,
surpassing heaven, being the teacher of gods and
humans." The great king, that is, us, asked
this question. Many people, whether
outsiders or those who are practicing asceticism, are
also asked, "What is the Buddha like that
you have to follow him
all day long, Buddha, Buddha, Buddha." We must
answer, "Because the Buddha is supreme and supreme.
What makes him supreme and supreme?
Because his wisdom surpasses everything,
surpasses humans, surpasses heaven, being the teacher of
gods and humans." "Is that correct?"
we will answer. "Why is that?
I am a disciple of the master of the world, the master
of gods and humans. From
gods to humans, I am a great disciple of
that master." The king asked, "How do you know?" Na Xian replied, "
Hearing the ten names of the Buddha that sentient beings
have praised is enough."  Knowing again, the great
Brahma deities, the most powerful beings
in the three realms, are disciples of the
Buddha, which proves this. Your Majesty, please
continue reading. Hearing the ten titles of the
Buddha that sentient beings have praised is enough to
know this point. We must understand that when
we are Buddhists, we must be
harmonious with each other. Wherever we go,
wherever we are, whatever position we hold, we must
demonstrate harmony, love, and
connection. Then people will naturally praise the
Buddha's teachings and praise our Teacher, right?
That is what we must know; it is
our responsibility. We
can make the Buddha's teachings stronger. We
strive, and we use
our bodies to teach people even a
single sentence. That is already sowing the seeds for
people to come to the Buddha's teachings, my dear fellow practitioners.
Otherwise, if people say, 'Oh,
leave these people,' then we're doomed, right?
Therefore, the Buddha's disciples themselves will
be the proof, praising the Buddha. You, fellow
practitioners, will be the ones praising
your own Dharma center and its merits.  The
actions of the master and the monks are solely the responsibility of us
Buddhists. We must
strive to practice the regulations of the Dharma center and the
club so that we can
receive the benefits and praise. Hearing the
Buddha's disciples praise the Buddha
and believe that the Buddha is the supreme being,
we must also cultivate ourselves so that
we can
praise the Buddha's teachings and
our guiding master. The
next question was, "Who said that? The
scriptures still record it." "Your Majesty,
how can you believe that?" the Immortal asked. "I heard
that Your Majesty is very good at mathematics.
Whose book did Your Majesty learn from? Is
that book by a
mathematician named
Tia? Is he still alive? If he is dead, then so be
it. The scriptures remain, even
though the Buddha has passed away. The
holy disciples have preserved and passed on this, and
we are now studying the Dharma. This includes the Dharma of the Buddha and the
nine transcendental paths. Therefore, it is said that the
Buddha is the supreme being." "Your Majesty, that is
very accurate." "Thank you, Venerable Monk." This part
shows us, the fellow practitioners,
our responsibility as disciples.  The
Buddha must take responsibility
when Nāgārjuna says that this king
is very good at mathematics. That is,
people should judge based on their own understanding,
not on their own. If
they judge based on your own understanding, they
will ask you where you studied,
and if you tell them where you studied,
they will praise the teacher.
That means this man was very good at learning
because of the books he left behind, books
left by Master Ti. He is no longer alive, he is
dead, but his fame
remains because of someone who was good at studying,
resulting in someone who was good at mathematics. So we
must be responsible to the Buddha's teachings.
Although the Buddha has passed away,
his precepts and teachings remain for
us. We must practice them effectively.
That means, before
studying Buddhism, we were terrible, right?
After studying Buddhism, we must
become more compassionate and loving.
That's the result. If we have the
result of that man being good at mathematics, then
our result must be that our heart, our
heart, must be more compassionate than
before.  People often complain and lament,
blaming heaven and earth, saying, "Why am I so miserable?
You are an evil person, you made me suffer."
But now, the Buddha's teachings
teach us about karma, so we become
more patient, more thoughtful, and understand that this is
our karmic consequence. Therefore, we rarely
or never blame heaven and earth anymore,
but instead become more patient and persistent in our practice to
transform ourselves. If our character changes, then the
Buddha's teachings in the books are
valuable. Because the Buddha's teachings in the books are
valuable, people praise the Buddha,
right? Therefore, it is said that the Buddha is
real. The Buddha is a master that everyone must learn from. For example, no matter how
talented a person is,
everyone experiences suffering. It's not just suffering from
knowledge, or from money, but also
from birth, old age, sickness, and death. Everyone suffers, and only the
Buddha's teachings
lead to the cessation of suffering. Therefore, the Buddha is the
master of heaven and earth; no one
else can be a teacher of the Buddha because both
heaven and earth must endure the suffering of
birth, old age, sickness, and death. Only the Buddha's teachings can bring about this cessation.
Humans must eliminate the suffering
of birth, old age, sickness, and death. As long as there is birth, there is
suffering; only when there is no birth will suffering end. That's how it is,
dear fellow practitioners. Those who
practice asceticism, those who eliminate all suffering and no
longer need to be born, prove
that the Buddha's teachings are wonderful,
that the Buddha is a master, right? Even though
he has passed away, we should be the same. Even though
people may not
know who our teacher is—whether it's our neighbor
or not—they may
not know who our teacher is or which temple we practice at.
But if we change our character, as great
disciples of the Buddha, we must examine our
hearts, our character, our
behavior before
and after becoming monks.
Every day, it must expand, becoming more
loving, more forgiving,
more patient, more joyful, and more helpful to
others, right? Then
people
will follow us to practice because their hearts will praise us. Praise
means there is a karmic connection
with us, dear fellow practitioners. That
's why, with praise, we can
first help our loved ones.
If our loved ones...  In many
past lives, I had very great negative karma, but
I was patient, I practiced, I didn't hold
grudges against them. Then
people would never approach me, understand?
So how can I be more loving, patient, and
tolerant? People may not
say it out loud, but they secretly admire me. That
secret admiration is the mind,
and this admiration is the foundation, is
n't it? In many lifetimes, I will be able to help others. Whether they are
happy or not, I will take
another step. Yes, they are studying
at Ba Vang Temple, which proves that
this teacher is so skilled. In many lifetimes, they have been
connected to him. That's right, thinking about the
benefit of sentient beings and constantly cultivating
patience and practice, isn't it?
We must think broadly, think
broadly. When we are patient,
but we understand the benefits of
patience, then
we will be able to progress. So, as Buddhists,
we must take responsibility for practicing the Buddha
's teachings.
Through this transformation, the
Buddha's teachings will be proclaimed,
right? That means they will be passed from
one person to another, creating connections.  Many
people... That's the benefit of
patience. As Buddhists, do we see how
great we are?
Patience is great because it helps sentient beings, so it
's great because it spreads the Dharma. That's why it's
great. So, when we do a
good deed, we don't give anything to anyone and we don't
lose anything; it automatically brings benefits to
ourselves. With patience, we can
become teachers to others, right? By silently helping others, we can become teachers to others. Then, when
we find a teacher, we and
they can both become teachers.
For example, Yến told a story about the
Buddha. When the Buddha taught
Sariputta and Moggallana, Sariputta
had
500 disciples, and Moggallana seemed to
have 400 disciples. Yến is
n't entirely sure about the difference between the two.
When the Buddha helped Sariputta
and Moggallana, and they attained
enlightenment, how many of Moggallana's disciples
followed him?  And
the Venerable Master has the nature of teaching and
guiding the masses, just like in
our club here. Then,
Yen is the club leader, and then
you are the leaders of the Dharma centers and committees.
Later, the people in your committees
will also have to rely on you
to guide and enlighten
others, right? Yen's connection is
a bit distant, like the
Buddha compared to his disciples, a thousand
years is even further. That means the
karmic connection must follow karma,
so Yen said that you can be the Dharma center
leader, deputy leader, or even the group leader, or the
head of the committee. You
must be diligent because you have
a connection with everyone, so you must be
diligent. But if you
become the wrong person and fail to guide people in their practice,
then the fellow practitioners in
that committee will leave and go to
another committee. So Yen said that if the
leadership is not good, the committee will lose that person,
okay? It's karma, and if the
Dharma center leader is weak, they will lose
that person, right? No one else...  Is
it acceptable to be bound by a karmic connection with someone who doesn't
practice the Dharma? No, but
we still have the teacher, and
in the context of the karmic connection, we still have the teacher. That means
we can still change the karmic connection; it's not fixed yet, right? It's not
fixed, but we have something fixed in the
teacher's karmic connection, while in our own karmic connection,
we have something not
fixed. For example, we might meet again in
different places. And in
that karmic connection, for example, the groups can still
move on, so in some lifetime we
might meet this group leader, but then
we can still leave for another place because of the karmic
connection. It's not a fixed karmic connection. There are esteemed fellow practitioners,
understood? But since
our karmic connection is in that group, we must do
something to improve because our karmic connection is there.
Therefore, as staff, we must
help the group leader to
change. The
group leader must help the
community, and the community must also encourage the
community. We have the Dharma to point out
mistakes and acknowledge them, right? Therefore, the
Buddha is a being of great wisdom and great compassion.  There
should be a Dharma for all of us Buddhists to
practice, applicable wherever we are in any country.
If Yen goes to
places full of evil people,
Yen can still become a good person and
not be infected by evil. If we
have the Dharma of the Buddha, and we sincerely
point out and acknowledge our mistakes, before long,
those people on the evil side will follow
Yen and not follow them anymore. Do you understand
this clearly? It is the element of the mind.
That is, the element of the mind means that
people follow
those who bring them benefits.
We are the same, everyone is the same, and the element of the
mind is like that. And
in this section, it is
mentioned that it includes the Dharma and the nine transcendental dharmas. The
nine transcendental dharmas consist
of the four paths, four fruits, and Nirvana.
Here, Yen also explains it to
us Buddhists. The teacher has already explained it:
the four noble paths are: the Stream-Entry Path, the Once-Return Path, the
Non-Return Path, and the Arhat Path. The four noble fruits are the
Stream-Entry Fruit, the
Once-Return Fruit, and the Non-Return Fruit.
The Arhat fruit is just that basic. That's all I
know.
These four fruits correspond to the four holy paths. The mind
also belongs to the transcendental realms of the worldly fruit.
The four holy paths of mind and the four holy fruit of
mind all belong to the transcendental realms of mind; only
Nirvana is the object. Each
holy path of mind gives rise to only one Ksara mind
for a saint, but each
fruit of mind can give rise to two or three Ksara
minds in the holy path of mind, and
each fruit of mind can continuously give rise to
countless Ksara minds for a period of time due to the
power of vows in the holy path of mind. The four holy paths of
mind give
fruit corresponding to the four holy fruit of mind. There is
no separation time. When attaining the
holy path, one immediately attains the holy fruit. That
is, after the holy path of mind ceases, the
holy fruit of mind immediately follows, corresponding to
each other. This is just the theory I'm reading.
Now, I'll give an example to encourage us
all.
We have cause and effect, and
these four holy paths of mind are the cause and effect, the four holy paths of fruit. The path of the stream, the path of the one-
returner, the path of the non-returner, the path of the
Arhat.
The path has two fruits: the
first stage of sainthood, the second stage of sainthood, the third stage of sainthood, and the third stage of
Arhatship. Let me give you an example
to help everyone understand: if
we work for 30 days and receive
3 million [Vietnamese Dong], these 30 days are likened to
entering the path of sainthood, and these
3 million [Vietnamese Dong] are likened to the fruit. Then, when the path of sainthood ceases, the fruit of sainthood arises. That is, after we finish 30 days, we receive the fruit of 3 million [Vietnamese Dong]. I'm
saying this so everyone can easily understand, because
we are beginners, so I have to explain it in a simple way. Regarding the path of sainthood,
why is it said that
it's not fixed? It could be one Kshatriya,
two Kshatriyas, three Kshatriyas; it
depends on the vows we make. For example,
we
might make vows to do these things,
and if those vows are full of
merit, then we can enter that
fruit. For example,
we are making a vow to practice and seek
liberation.  When Bodhi is attained, after
achieving enlightenment,
countless emanations appear, traveling everywhere to save
sentient beings and help them become Buddhas. Then, after the New Year,
we attain the state of perfect enlightenment,
meaning we finally enter Nirvana,
right? That is, when we reach a certain stage and
attain the holy path, that is, when we are close
to the holy fruit, we
don't stay at that fruit but continue to perform
meritorious deeds, manifesting countless emanations. This means
we can enter other realms to
perform meritorious deeds. This is due to
the vows we make, the great
assembly. Therefore, it is said here
that each holy fruit mind can continuously give rise to
countless Kshatriya minds for a period of time
due to the power of the vows made in the holy fruit, the path of concentration, the
mind that determines the path, the great assembly. There
are also vows like, "
I'm too tired, I just
want to cultivate until I reach Arhatship, then we
rest and enter Nirvana." Well, once we reach the
Arhat stage, we enter Nirvana,
but we want
not to enter Nirvana. At that holy fruit,
we continue to go on to practice.  We endure
hardships so that we can
help others cultivate
until all sentient beings are gone. Only then will we reach
that fruit. This vow of
ours is that we will only
rest in that fruit when all sentient beings are gone.
Doesn't that sound tiring? Doesn't that sound like a
decay of the Bodhi mind?
No, but we haven't reached
that vow
yet. We only aspire to Supreme Bodhi,
meaning we will continue until we
achieve Supreme Bodhi. Only then will we
attain the fruit of Supreme Bodhi. We haven't yet
made a vow to attain
enlightenment, manifest countless forms, and
travel everywhere until all sentient beings become Buddhas
before remaining in the position of perfect enlightenment.
Hearing this today, no one will
dare make such a vow again. Once you have attained enlightenment, you won't
see suffering. Now, we
are suffering, and we think that the
Bodhisattvas who go to save sentient beings also suffer, but that's not true. They
also go to save sentient beings, but they do
n't suffer. We must be certain of
this because they have eradicated
the fruit of suffering and only go to
help sentient beings.  So how can there still be suffering, right,
dear fellow practitioners? Therefore, just rest
assured and cultivate Bodhicitta.
Bodhicitta is a vast vow to seek
Supreme Enlightenment. If sentient beings need a
body, it will reside in that body to save them.
If not, then just make the
vow. Then, when you're
too tired, you can withdraw the
vow. A vow is just a
vow, dear fellow practitioners. At some
point, we're diligently practicing and then we say, "I'm
too tired, I'll stop. I wish to
practice and enter Nirvana." Then
that vow comes back to us because we have
n't yet attained
enlightenment. So, when we keep
practicing and the results come,
we have both. Sometimes we say we're too tired to
rest, sometimes we want to achieve
Supreme Enlightenment. Whichever merit is
more diligent, we will return to that point. It's like
we just keep practicing according to the
capacity of our minds, and we will
benefit. Here, the Venerable Master encourages the community
in this way: our karma is still, and our karmic retribution is
still.  We are
tired and weary. We ask ourselves, "Oh my god, I've been practicing
Buddhism for so long and I'm still suffering. I don't know when this suffering will end." Because of this, we become lazy and stop practicing. If we stop practicing, we create more
karma, and that karma only adds to our suffering. Therefore, we
must be certain that
we will only get what we want. Because
our desires are too many.
For example,
we work for others. Ideally, we should just wish for enough to eat. We're struggling to make ends meet, and we should just wish for
enough to eat.
But this wish goes beyond our
reach. We keep wishing for something like the
neighbor's Mercedes
and the neighbor's
five-star hotel. We wish for something like, "
When will I have a Mercedes and a
five-star hotel? I'll just keep doing
business and eating." This person is sad and suffering.
Every day is sad and
sorrowful because our desires exceed
our limits. When we are suffering, our children
are busy playing and scolding us,
right? Then we wish for...  I hope it
's playful but I don't scold it, I hope it changes
little by little so I can
see it transform, right? But you
can't surpass that. Other
people's children become directors, but you're
always loafing around playing. The
more you do that, the more miserable you'll become, right? I
just hope it doesn't go out to play, that would be
good, wouldn't it? But you have to
hope for gradual progress, step by step, so you can lessen the
suffering and become more diligent, so you
can observe the change,
right? But you
refuse to take things one step at a time, you keep wanting to
leapfrog, while you're lazy and
sluggish in your practice. For example, going to the temple. You
should put your things away properly before
going to work, but instead, you
go to the temple,
take the alms, and then complain, "How awful!
Why is the kitchen doing this today? Why is
the water so bland?" There's no compassion or kindness involved. How can
it be fast? That's also practicing
Buddhism, but one is about
dedication and the other is about enjoying blessings.
How can it be fast? Do you understand?  Going
inside... If only I had finished begging for alms and there was no
food left, I would have said, "
Well, that's how it is, so I'll eat it, and see how
happy everyone is." They don't know how tired people are from
working since morning. The kitchen
cooks in such a way that the women in the alms hall don't
know how to
share, leaving us hungry. Even if
two people run out of food, if one person runs out, they'll still be
very happy, right? "
Well, I'll eat a little, and if there's any left over,
I'll eat more, is that okay?" That
's the kind of person who knows how to practice. We're together, not
in the same situation, but
two different states arise. For example,
arriving and seeing the women in the alms hall, they're busy, they yell, they glare, "Ugh, I
only said that and they already yelled!" Ah, that
's one state of mind. Another
state is that they're too tired, like me.
All day long, work... no
one is perfect, there are things you can endure and
control, and there are things you can't endure or
control. These two thoughts
lead to...  There are two different consequences, are
n't there? One person
will later receive understanding and support from others,
meaning their karma will be eliminated, and
their children will understand and love
them. The other person's karma is that when their
husband left, they let him go, but when he
came back, they yelled at him. That's also just going to the temple.
Because the blessings they received were
only that much, and being
scolded was just karma. If they had
paid off that karma
happily, then if they had been happy before their husband
left, he would have been happier when he returned.
But if they had received
that kind of blessing, they would have committed sin, and then their
husband would have yelled at them even more, and their blessings would have
decreased. That's the precious thing, right? So, if
we think about it, we
can be diligent. Therefore,
in this article, we see that there is a
path to enlightenment, a path to sainthood. Practicing the
practices of sainthood will lead to something. The result
is sainthood, that is,
entering the stream of sainthood, and then there will
be the fruit of sainthood.
So, as Buddhists, we should just
persevere.  If you persevere, you will
reap the rewards. That depends on
each person's vows and karma. When everything is complete, the
reward will be whatever it is. That's why we can be
diligent. I wish all of
us, the Great Friends, to be very, very
diligent because we have studied the Dharma.
[Music]
[Applause]